ADR: authentication and authorization (#20)
williamdclt/nestjs-admin: docs/adr/01-admin-authentication.md

# Authenticate to the admin interface

## Status

Proposed

## Context

The admin interface obviously cannot be public for the vast majority of websites. This means that we need to provide a way to handle authentication and authorization.

### Characteristics

We want this authentication system to be:

- Easy to set up for nestjs-admin developpers (or better: working out-of-the-box)
- Extensible to handle a wide range of use cases

### What does django-admin do?

> Django-admin uses the builtin "user" model, that has a username and password. It also allows to

Reviewer: Allows to what? 😉

> Django-admin uses the builtin "user" model, that has a username and password. It also allows to

Author: ```suggestion
Django-admin uses the builtin "user" model, that has a username and password. It allows them to rely on these fields for authentication, in addition to `is_staff` and `is_superuser` fields.
```

### Challenges

1. NestJS, as opposed to frameworks like Django, has no built-in concept of "user" with a username and password. We cannot rely on this.
2. Users come in all shapes and form: identified through username, email, id, using a password or not... There's no invariant we can rely on.

> 3. We need to make sure whatever solution we choose doesn't lock everybody out of the admin interface by default (we need to manually be able to create an admin, like django-admin with `./manage.py createsuperuser`)

Reviewer 2: This is a super good point

### Options

> 1. Have the developper extend the Admin controller, which will allow them to define their own guard and authentication logic

Reviewer 2: typo on "developper"

> 1. Have the developper extend the Admin controller, which will allow them to define their own guard and authentication logic

Author: ```suggestion
1. Have the developer extend the Admin controller, which will allow them to define their own guard and authentication logic
```

   - Very flexible
   - Nothing to do for us but documentation
   - Lot of friction to start using nestjs-admin, it makes the lib not usable out-of-the-box

2. Add some config for the admin module to specify the User entity, which needs to implement some AdminUserInterface (getAdminUsername, getAdminPassword, isAdmin). We can then have a guard to implement authentication/authorization.

   - Need to implement a login page
   - Not very flexible, we'll have to make assumptions (user has a username and a password)

3. Provide an AdminUser entity out-of-the-box, that has a username and password.

   - Need to implement a login page
   - Not very flexible. Admin entities are distinct from User entities, which is annoying (how to create admins? Choose their password?).
   - Works entirely out-of-the-box

## Decision

> The N.1 concern at the time is to make this library self-contained, usable out-of-the-box. For this reason, we'll go for option 1.

Reviewer: Is it not option 3 as mentioned below?

Reviewer 2: N.3 ;)

> The downsides of this option (flexibility, Users distinct from Admins) can be mitigated:

Reviewer: Why not do no. 2 instead and allow users to extend the User entity for their own purpose a la django?

Author: Tempting, but it means the lib wouldn't work out-of-the-box, you need to touch your user model before (which might not exist if you're just starting a project)

- For more flexibility, we could also provide a AdminUserInterface, that can be implemented by another entity (a User entity very probably) and allow configuring the AdminModule to use this entity (option 2)
- We can still let the developper extend the admin controller to implement their own guard (option 1., need to document how)

## Consequences / roadmap

> The very first step is to implement option 3 (login page, AdminUser entity, authentication logic). This will make this library valuable. This is a high priority, Theodo developpers are assigned to it.

Reviewer 2: type two ps again lol
